# Data_Gravem and Morgan_2019_Trait-mediated indirect effects in a natural tidepool system
Citation: Gravem, S.A. and S.G. Morgan. 2019. Trait-mediated indirect effects in a natural tidepool system. Marine Biology. DOI: 10.1007/s00227-019-3469-5
Contact: 
Sarah Gravem, Dept of Integrative Biology, 3029 Cordley Hall, Oregon State University, Corvallis OR 97331, USA
gravems@oregonstate.edu, https://www.sarahgravem.com
Steven Morgan, Bodega Marine Laboratory, PO Box 247, Bodega Bay, CA 94923, USA
sgmorgan@ucdavis.edu

# Dataset: TidepoolSurveys_Public
# Methods
To determine whether Leptasterias and Tegula were associated with one another and whether refuge use by snails was associated with sea star density, we surveyed 63 small mid to high intertidal tidepools between 6 to14-Jul-2009 in Horseshoe Cove, located within the Bodega Marine Reserve in northern California (38 degrees 19’ N, 123 degrees 14’ W). We calculated the densities of sea stars and snails as individuals per liter (tide pool volume methods described below), which allowed comparisons among tidepools of different size and served as a proxy for chemical cue concentration of predators. We also counted Tegula in refuge habitats, which we termed the “halo” and defined as a <15 cm band of emersed rock encircling each tidepool. Leptasterias do not occur in halos during low tide at this site, presumably due to physiological stress. 

To test whether sea stars, snails, and other invertebrates were associated with the algal community structure and with abiotic factors, we surveyed macroinvertebrates and algae in the same 63 tidepools described above. We estimated cover of common macroalgal species by placing a large gridded quadrat (1 x 1.5 m with 2 x 2 cm cells) over each tidepool and tallying cells >50% occupied by a given species or bare space (double occupancy was allowed). We calculated the percent cover for each species by dividing the surface area of occupied cells by the surface area of the tidepool (calculated from photos in Image J). We calculated the densities of macroinvertebrates as individuals per liter. For each tide pool, shore level at the surface (Mean +/- SD: 1.41 +/- 0.36m above MLLW; range: 0.60 - 2.25m above MLLW) was measured using surveying equipment and USGS benchmarks. Volume (Mean +/- SD: 21.57 +/- 21.59L; range: 1.2 -107.1L) was determined by measuring water manually pumped from tidepools. Average depth (Mean +/- SD: 9.2 +/- 5.5cm range:3.2 - 38.6cm) was calculated from 5 random depth measurements. Perimeter (Mean +/- SD: 2.66 +/- 0.95m; range: 1.04 - 4.75m) and surface area (Mean +/- SD: 0.216 +/- 0.137m2; range: 0.051 – 0.611m2) were quantified from digital photographs using ImageJ software.

# Datasets: ShortTermExpts_Public, LongTermExpts_Public, Macroalgae_Public, Microalgae_Public
# Methods
Experimental manipulations

To determine whether Leptasterias induced short and long-term habitat shifts by Tegula and subsequently caused TMIIs on algae, we performed manipulative experiments in 37 of the surveyed tidepools that ranged from 0.77 - 2.25 m above MLLW, 1.9 - 85.0 L in volume, and 0.05 - 0.51 m2 in surface area. Each tidepool was designated as either originally “sea star-dominated” (Leptasterias present and <1 Tegula L-1) or originally “snail-dominated” (Leptasterias absent and >1 Tegula L-1) using the surveys above. We manipulated Leptasterias and Tegula in 8 treatments with 3 to 6 tidepools per treatment (Fig. 1). For the originally sea star-dominated tidepools we removed Leptasterias or added Tegula in a factorial design. For the originally snail-dominated tidepools we removed Tegula or added Leptasterias in a factorial design. Among these 8 treatments, snails began experiments in 4 different starting conditions (Fig. 1), including 1) snails marked and added to tidepools (pink snails in treatments 1 & 2), 2) snails in halos (green snails in treatments 1 - 4), 3) snails inside tidepools (blue snails in treatments 5 & 6), and 4) snails immigrating to tidepools or halos from other areas (purple snails in treatments 1 - 8). Snails most commonly began experiments in the halos in the originally sea star-dominated tidepools and in the tidepools in the originally snail-dominated tidepools. To avoid tampering with snails and altering their natural behaviors, all snails except those added to tidepools were not marked and were thus indistinguishable within most of the treatments (Fig. 1). However, we were able to independently assess the behaviors of immigrants in isolation using the snail removal treatments (7 & 8). When sea stars were present in tidepools, we expected snails to generally avoid sea stars regardless of their starting condition; we expected snails inside or added to tidepools to flee, snails in refuges outside tidepools to remain there, and snails immigrating from elsewhere to choose refuges rather than tidepools. 

Snails and sea stars were added to tidepools at the natural densities (12.8 snails L-1 and 1.8 sea stars L-1, respectively) that were recorded during surveys of the 63 tidepools described above. This density of Leptasterias added to originally snail-dominated tidepools was maintained throughout the study by replacing escaped sea stars (treatments 5 & 7). All treatments began on July 13, 2009 and snails were added twice to originally sea star-dominated tidepools (treatments 1 & 2), each at the beginning of two 1-month short-term experiments (13-Jul to 19-Aug-2009 and 1 to 28-Oct-2009). To distinguish these snails from snails already in the tidepools, halos, or immigrants, these added snails were marked with fingernail enamel that remained on snail shells for many months. While it is unclear whether marking the snails affected their behavior, we believe these effects were minor compared to behavioral responses to the necessary handling of the snails that were added to the tidepools. This design also allowed us to investigate whether snails in the halos (unmarked snails in treatments 1 - 4) would respond to the sudden increase in conspecific density by reducing their antipredator behavior, presumably due to the sudden decrease in predation risk (Peacor 2003).

During short-term experiments snails in all 37 tidepools and halos were counted, and the 8 treatments were maintained almost daily for 1 week and then weekly for 3 weeks. The second short-term manipulation was concurrent with experiments testing TMII effects of sea stars on microalgal growth (described below). Other predators such as Pisaster ochraceus, Cancer productus, and Romaleon antennarium were present in the area and may have eaten snails or influenced their behavior. However, 1) we recorded the presence of these predators and removed them at each visit, 2) observations were rare and did not statistically differ in frequency among tidepool treatments, 3) we excluded any time points from analyses where these predators were present in a tidepool, 4) any behavioral effects on snails by these relatively mobile predators appeared fleeting (lasting hours to a few days)  compared to Leptasterias that often stayed in the same tidepools for weeks, and 5) these predators should not have strongly influenced refuge use since halo refuges do not exist at high tide when these predators are present and/or active. Other grazers including sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus), hermit crabs (Pagurus spp.), littorine snails (Littorina spp.), and limpets (Lottia spp.) were present in the tidepools and may have influenced algal abundances during experiments. Of these taxa, snails and limpets flee from Leptasterias (personal observation), so their responses may have contributed to any TMII effects of sea stars on algae during the experiments, especially in the snail removal treatments. Time constraints prevented us from recording grazer densities at each time step and thus we were unable to include them as a covariate in analyses. Instead we surveyed grazer densities at the start and end (at ~ 4weeks) of each short-term snail addition to test for differences in responses by non-focal grazers to experimental treatments.

To determine the long-term responses by snails to sea stars, we maintained the above experimental treatments in the same 37 tidepools for 10 months (13-Jul-2009 until 17-May-2010). We maintained sea star densities and removed and counted snails in the snail removals (treatments 7 & 8) approximately weekly, totaling 47 times. Long-term snail behavior was sampled in all 37 tidepools 5 times: during the first week of each short-term experiment (weeks of 13-Jul and 1-Oct-2009, behaviors over each time period were averaged) and on 19-Aug-2009, 28-Oct-2009 and 10-Apr-2010. This long-term manipulation was concurrent with experiments testing for TMII effects of sea stars on macroalgal cover, growth and recruitment and on microalgal growth (described below). 

Though some exchange of snails between tidepools undoubtedly occurred, we assumed that the tidepool manipulations were operating independently from one another for several reasons. First, sea stars and many thousands of snails occurred in the matrix between tidepools that were not part of the experiment, so the vast majority of immigrants to tidepools were not those fleeing from other experimental tidepools. Second, ample snail and sea star habitat occurred in the matrix between our tidepools, including emersed rock, crevices and many large tidepools that were not part of the experiment, so when a snail left an experimental tidepool it was unlikely to immigrate to a second experimental tidepool quickly. Third, we observed only occasional exchange of marked snails between tidepools and the sea stars added to the tidepools often remained in the same crevice in a given tidepool for many weeks. Finally, many Tegula and other prey species were available to sea stars in tidepools, making it unlikely that sea stars pursued fleeing snails. 

Behavioral metrics

We did not track individual snails and they were allowed to freely immigrate to and emigrate from tidepools. Hence, all behaviors are the average for the snail population in a tidepool when measured, though we were able to assess added (marked) snails separately from already present snails and immigrants (unmarked). We used the percentage of snails in the halos to assess average refuge use [(snails in the halo/ snails in tidepool and halo) x 100]. This metric likely underestimated refuge use in response to sea stars for two reasons. First, it did not include snails that fled further than the 15-cm wide halo area or immigrant snails that avoided the tidepool and halo completely. Second, it did not include any use of refuges within tidepools, such as cracks or under and on algal fronds, which were less accessible to predators. To estimate snail abundance, we used snail densities in tidepools per unit volume (L-1) because tidepools varied in size. Increases in snail densities estimated immigration to a tidepool from the halo or surrounding area. Since we could not separate predation from emigration, decreases in snail densities represent combined consumptive and non-consumptive effects. We assess the relative strengths of potential consumptive effects, non-consumptive effects, TMIIs and DMIIs in the discussion."

Impact on algae

Growth of microalgae during short-term experiments. To determine the effects of snails and sea stars on microalgae, we deployed 6 bare porcelain tiles (2.4 x 2.4 cm) using marine epoxy in each of the 37 experimental tidepools during the second short-term snail addition experiment (1 to 28-Oct-2009). At 2 and 4 weeks, respectively), we collected 3 tiles in each tidepool. Originally sea star-dominated tidepools with no snails added (treatments 3&4) and snail-dominated tidepools with snails removed (treatments 7 & 8) served as controls for algal recruitment under low snail herbivory conditions. We estimated microalgal growth on tiles using chlorophyll-a concentration, which was extracted by placing each tile in acetone for 24 hours (as per Morelissen and Harley 2007) and analyzed using a fluorometer (TD-700, Turner Designs) with F4T4.5 B2 lamp with 436 nm excitation and 680 nm emission filters (as per Welschmeyer 1994). Between paired treatments with and without sea stars (1 vs. 2, 3 vs. 4, etc.), we expected sea star presence to benefit microalgae, indicating potential positive TMIIs.

Since the starting conditions of the organisms were different, we analyzed originally sea star-dominated (treatments 1-4) and snail-dominated (treatments 5-8) tidepools separately using mixed generalized linear models. We used glmmADMB function and package for the sea-star dominated tidepools because this allowed us to specify negative binomial distributions (to account for over-dispersion in the data), and used glmer function in lme4 package specifying a gamma distribution for the snail-dominated tidepools. We analyzed the effects of week (2 or 4 weeks), sea star presence and snail treatment on chlorophyll-a, with tidepool included as a random factor. In only the originally sea star-dominated tidepools, too many tiles were lost after 4-weeks, so only the 2-week tile collection was analyzed and time was dropped from the model. We calculated the magnitude of the TMII as the difference in microalgal cover between paired predator present versus absent treatments within each snail treatment (i.e., between light and dark paired bars in Fig. 6) at 2 and 4 weeks. 

Cover of macroalgae. Macroalgal surveys were conducted between 6 and 8-Jul-2009 (just before the experimental manipulations began) as part of the tidepool surveys outlined above, and they were repeated 1 month later on 4 and 5-Aug-2009 to determine the effects of Leptasterias and Tegula manipulations on macroalgal cover in the 37 experimental tidepools. Additional macroalgal cover surveys were planned, but harbor seals (Phoca vitulina) killed the algae in many tidepools in fall 2009. To test if snail and sea star treatments changed cover of individual macroalgal species in tidepools over 1 month, we ran multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVA) in JMP on change in percent cover of bare rock and the 19 common macroalgal species. We also analyzed the effects of survey date and sea star and snail treatments on algal community structure, with tidepool number (nested within overall treatment) included to control for repeated measures among tidepools (PERMANOVA using Bray Curtis similarity matrices and 999 maximum permutations). For both these analyses originally sea star-dominated and snail-dominated tidepools were analyzed separately. 

Growth and recruitment of macroalgae during long-term experiments. We also tested the effects of Tegula and Leptasterias on macroalgal growth and recruitment in cleared plots since growing tissue and early life stages may be more vulnerable to Tegula herbivory. In each of the 37 experimental tidepools, we denuded 4 circular plots (5.08 cm diameter) with a small blowtorch between 17 and 22-Sept-2009. Individual recruits were defined as individuals that settled within plots and growing new thalli or crusts (typically Mazzaella flaccida, Mastocarpus papillatus, and encrusting coralline, red, or green algae). Encroaching algae was defined as existing nearby algae that had grown into the plot (typically Cladophora columbiana, articulated coralline algae, and encrusting coralline or red algae). After ~8 months (between 26-Apr and 17-May-2010), the number and percent cover of individual algal recruits and encroaching algae were surveyed, with percent cover calculated using a gridded circular quadrat (5.08 cm diameter with 24 0.84 x 0.84 cm cells). We analyzed the effects of sea star and snail treatments on the number and cover of algal recruits and the cover of encroaching algae in each clearing plot using a mixed general linear model fit using restricted estimated maximum likelihood (REML) in JMP, and included tidepool number nested within sea star and snail treatments as a random factor to control for non-independence of plots within the same tidepool. Between paired treatments with and without sea stars (1 vs. 2, 3 vs. 4, etc.), we expected sea star presence to benefit macroalgae, indicating potential positive TMIIs.

